Military recruits enter the chamber one by one and don
protective masks. Tear gas swirls. Then, the order: Take off
your mask and breathe. Eyes well and throats tighten, and men
and women training for war uncontrollably gag.

Nearly every uniform is coated in snot. Some recruits vomit.

The exercise demonstrates to troops that their equipment works.
It also shows, in a visceral way, what happens if an enemy
targets U.S. forces with an agent such as tear gas, commonly
known as CS gas — an aerosol compound considered a chemical
weapon that has been outlawed on the battlefield by nearly
every nation on Earth, including the United States.

But as a riot-control agent, 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile is
legal to use by both police and federal authorities in the
United States and many other countries.

How a photographer captured the image of a migrant mother
and her children fleeing tear gas.

On Sunday, U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents fired
the chemical agent at mostly Honduran migrants attempting to
cross into the United States from Tijuana, Mexico — an unusual
escalation of lobbing weapons over an international border at
unarmed civilians seeking refuge, drawing condemnation from
Democrats.

“I felt that my face was burning, and my baby fainted. I ran
for my life and that of my children,” Cindy Milla, a Honduran
migrant with two children, told the Wall Street Journal.

President Trump defended the use of tear gas on Monday, telling
reporters it was deployed in response to “tremendous violence”
during the confrontation with authorities.

“Three Border Patrol people yesterday were very badly hurt
through getting hit with rocks and stones,” Trump said.

But that contradicts a Monday statement from CBP
Commissioner Kevin McAleenan, who said four of his agents were
struck by rocks “but were wearing protective gear and did not
suffer serious injuries.”

Trump also questioned why a parent would run into an area
filling with tear gas, saying without evidence that some adults
grabbed unrelated children “because they think they will have a
certain status by having a child.”

Soon after, Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said
in a statement that “the accepted use of nonlethal force
(also used by the Obama Administration in 2013) prevented
further injury to agents and a mass illegal rush across the
border.” The statement never mentioned tear gas.

Chemical weapons such as CS gas are indiscriminate and
“uniquely terrorizing in their application,” which necessitated
their ban in combat in 1993, said Kelsey Davenport, director of
nonproliferation policy at the Washington-based Arms Control
Association.

Once launched in a volley or thrown into an area, chemical
weapons cannot be controlled and can drift toward people who
are not targets, Davenport told The Washington Post on Monday.

‘You could actually put it on your nachos and eat it,’ Fox
guest says of gas used at the Mexican border.

In battle, that would include civilians and wounded troops, and
even friendly soldiers if the winds shift. U.S. battle planners
in World War I accounted for American casualties from U.S.
forces' own asphyxiating gas attacks.

On the border Sunday, officials described aggressive men
rushing the fence, necessitating a response that included tear
gas.

But women and children, some in diapers, also came into
contact with tear gas, raising questions about whether the use
of gas was an appropriate response.

Research has noted that an infant exposed to CS gas
develops severe pneumonitis and requires a month of
hospitalization. But the effects of tear gas on younger bodies
is not well documented, said Anthony H. Cordesman, a biological
and chemical weapons expert at the Washington-based Center for
Strategic and International Studies.

“We don’t have the ability to easily predict effects unless
there is more history of use against children,” Cordesman told
The Post. “It looks like we’re setting the precedent.”

CBP officials said 42 people, mostly men, were apprehended on
the U.S. side of the border.

A CBP spokesman did not respond to a request for comment on
agency policies for when it is appropriate to use CS gas,
whether there concerns about firing over the border, or how
many rounds were fired. No serious injuries of migrants
were reported.

The effects of tear gas generally subside an hour or so after
contact, making it one of the least dangerous chemical weapons
that have been used in the last century. Weapons such as
mustard gas and nerve agents have been used in combat with
devastating results, and the Syrian government has used
chlorine gas to terrorize civilians and separatists there.

Photos of children and mothers fleeing from tear gas could sour
public opinion on the border operation itself, Cordesman noted.

“You don’t want to escalate force to a level that discredits
your operation,” he said.

The photos outraged Democrats critical of Trump’s response to
the migrant caravan. Gavin Newsom, the Democratic
governor-elect of California, argued that images of kids
sprinting from tear gas run counter to American ideals.

U.S. border officials prepare for additional
confrontations with migrants, port closures.

“These children are barefoot. In diapers. Choking on tear
gas,” he tweeted. “Women and children who left their lives
behind — seeking peace and asylum — were met with violence and
fear. That’s not my America. We’re a land of refuge. Of hope.
Of freedom. And we will not stand for this.”

Tear gas was used during protests in Ferguson, Mo., after the
2014 police shooting death of Michael Brown, drawing similar
rebukes from rights groups and citizens who said the police
response was disproportionate.

Middle Eastern and African countries typically use CS gas more
potent than what U.S. authorities wield — with devastating
results.

In 2013, Egyptian police fired tear gas into the back of a
vehicle carrying supporters of ousted president Mohamed Morsi
to prison, asphyxiating and killing 37 people. An attorney
for the men posted photos of one corpse on Twitter with a face
so darkened that families believed at first that the
victims burned to death.

Other people have been killed by inhaling CS gas or by the
projectiles themselves.

The first of subsequent chemical weapons bans occurred after
World War I, Davenport said, after the international community
was shocked by twisted corpses in the trenches and horrific
wounds of troops who survived with blistered skin and scarred
lungs.

In the modern era, the use of chemical weapons by Iraqi leader
Saddam Hussein in war and against Iraqi civilians was a
factor to push for a total ban of chemical agents, Davenport
said.

The 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention banned not only the use of
chemical weapons in war but also the production and stockpiling
of weapons for 193 signatories, she said. Israel has signed
but not ratified the convention. North Korea, Egypt and South
Sudan have not taken action.
