Migrant caravans winding their way toward the U.S. are
reigniting rhetoric and arguments about immigration and border
security. And it's not the first time. USA TODAY

Mexican Police officers block the way to Central American
migrants trying to reach the El Chaparral border crossing close
to the Mexico-U.S. border, in Tijuana, Mexico, on November 25,
2018.(Photo: GUILLERMO ARIAS, AFP/Getty Images)

President Donald Trump continued his attacks against a caravan
of Central American immigrants Monday, describing some of them
as "stone cold criminals," but his administration
provided scant details to back up the president's assertion.

Trump's attempts to portray members of the caravan as criminals
capped off a chaotic weekend that saw immigrants rushing the
San Ysidro Port of Entry and U.S. agents responding by
firing tear gas into the crowd, leaving a tense standoff
that could escalate in the days to come.

Customs and Border Protection said four officers were
struck with rocks before they fired tear gas at the migrants.
Photos posted on social media showed immigrants – some of them
women with small children – running from the scene.

CBP Commissioner Kevin McAleenan said there were no reported
serious injuries during clashes when more than 1,000 immigrants
tried to cross first in vehicle lanes, then through gaps in the
fence or along the Tijuana River channel. He said 69 immigrants
were detained Sunday during the clashes for crossing illegally.

CBP deployed 500 officers from other field offices, 250 members
of the special operations group and 300 Border Patrol agents
from other sectors, including the northern border, to help in
the San Diego area.

Are criminals traveling with the caravan?

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said last week
while visiting San Diego, and McAleenan repeated Monday, that
500 criminals are suspected of traveling with the caravan.

“We have information of participation of over 500 individuals
with criminal records as part of the caravan," McAleenan said.
"That is gathered through direct engagement, as well as
information sharing with our government of Mexico partners."

McAleenan pointed out that the government of Mexico arrested
more than 100 members of the caravan for what it described as
"criminal activity" during their time in Mexico.

The administration has not provided any details on caravan
members it considers criminals or how it got that information.
That is similar to what happened in October, when Trump
claimed that members of the caravan were “criminals” and
“Middle Easterners."

The Department of Homeland Security circulated data about
annual arrest numbers in an attempt to show that criminals were
likely to be part of the caravan.

The agency pointed out that in fiscal year 2018, Customs and
Border Protections authorities working along the southwestern
border apprehended 17,256 criminals, 1,019 gang members and
3,028 “special interest aliens,” defined by the Government
Accountability Office as “aliens from countries of special
interest to the United States such as Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq
and Pakistan.”

Those represented a small fraction of all people caught trying
to enter the country illegally. In 2018, CBP apprehended a
total of 396,579 undocumented border crossers, meaning 4.4
percent were criminals, 0.3 percent were gang members, and 0.8
percent were “special interest aliens.”

Vice President Mike Pence relied on those percentages during
a speech in October when he said, “It’s inconceivable that
there are not people of Middle Eastern descent in a crowd of
more than 7,000 people.”

What caused the clash Sunday?

Thousands of immigrants from Central America are waiting in
makeshift shelters in Tijuana for a chance to apply for asylum
in the USA. U.S. officials at the San Ysidro Port of Entry, the
nation's largest land entry point, can process only up to 100
asylum requests per day, creating an enormous line that means
monthslong waits for some immigrants.

Some immigrants organized protests to try to pressure the
United States to devote more resources to the process. One of
the protests turned chaotic when several hundred immigrants
broke away and rushed a border fence.

CBP officers said they were pelted with projectiles before they
fired tear gas at the immigrants. CBP shut down north- and
southbound traffic at San Ysidro for nearly six hours.

McAleenan said the use of nonlethal force, such as tear gas, is
allowed by trained personnel only and will be thoroughly
reviewed. The goal was to use the gas at the border, but wind
could carry it farther.

The chaos Sunday began when immigrants overwhelmed Mexican
authorities and tried to rush through traffic lanes at the San
Ysidro crossing, McAleenan said.

When blocked there, the immigrants moved east and tried to
enter through holes in the fence, he said. There were multiple
assaults, and debris was thrown at CBP officers, McAleenan
said.

Then immigrants went west of the port to the Tijuana River
channel, where there were more assaults and rock-throwing, he
said.

Mexico should move the flag waving Migrants, many of whom
are stone cold criminals, back to their countries. Do it by
plane, do it by bus, do it anyway you want, but they are NOT
coming into the U.S.A. We will close the Border permanently
if need be. Congress, fund the WALL!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 26, 2018
