The Trump administration is on a mission to guard Fortress
America against an invading caravan of migrant families from
Central America. And it is pulling out all the stops: denying
those families their rights to seek asylum, threatening to cut
off foreign aid, deploying thousands of troops to the southern
border, using tear gas against women and children, and closing
vital border crossings.

But no matter how much President Trump increases the
intimidation tactics, his strategy of deterrence is bound to
fail. The United States is failing to recognize the blind
desperation of the Central American migrants. If the president
were serious about regulating undocumented migration, he would
consider a strategy of constructive engagement with regional
governments and migrant communities, which is the only policy
with a realistic chance of working.

In response to a wave of unaccompanied child migrants
crossing the southwest border, the Barack Obama administration
in 2014 partnered with Northern Triangle countries — Honduras,
Guatemala and El Salvador — and earned bipartisan support from
Congress for a new approach to curbing migration. The strategy
recognized that slowing undocumented migration meant addressing
its root causes. It encouraged Northern Triangle governments to
recognize their responsibilities to aid their poorer and more
vulnerable communities. Success was predicated on promoting
sustainable and integral development, and called for migrant
communities to be directly involved in the design of projects
funded through the program.

Despite scattered examples of success, the strategy has largely
failed to live up to its hype. But there is a silver lining.
The experience yielded important insights, highlighting the
obstacles to success and suggesting pathways forward.

For starters, U.S. foreign assistance to the region remains
inadequate to alleviate the pressures to migrate. The
roughly $500 million provided in 2017 represents a mere 1
percent of the total foreign-assistance budget. Less than half
of that is invested in programs designed to promote economic
growth, good governance and human rights — the problem areas
that contribute most dramatically to fueling migration, with
some 20 percent spent on border and drug control, including
hefty sums spent on military training.

Because these numbers pale in comparison to the roughly $19
billion migrants send in remittances each year, migration
continues to loom large as a solution to entrenched poverty for
migrants, their families and their communities.

Making matters worse, the bottom-up vision endorsed by strategy
architects has fallen by the wayside. Funding has gone to
private consulting firms who have limited knowledge of local
cultural norms and economic practices. Instead of engaging in
community consultation or providing training to intended
project beneficiaries, they disburse large sums of money to
poor communities who lack the technical expertise, financial
capacity and self-confidence to manage these productively.

Conversations with Guatemalan community leaders provide
illustrative examples. Several complained about an approach
that limits interaction with communities to an outside
consultant holding a one-off workshop to explain project
design.

“This is a recipe for failure,” a local development worker
said. He didn’t want his name used for fear of repercussions.
“They talk in Spanish to indigenous speakers, and use terms
that people can’t understand. It’s worse than doing nothing
because it aggravates their feelings of inferiority.”

Another derided an irrigation project planned for a community
that still fetched water in buckets from the river. The
director of a respected community organization recalled that
when he complained that the funds earmarked for a project were
excessive, the consultant found a willing group of people
without a proven track record or local legitimacy to execute
the project.

Too little attention has been devoted to the needs of the
internally displaced and deportees — groups who are among the
most likely international migrants. Migration tends to be
sequential, beginning with internal displacement and eventually
leading to international migration. According to the
International Displacement Monitoring Center, more than 700,000
Central Americans are currently internally displaced as result
of environmentally-induced poverty or gang violence. Rather
than improve their situation, displacement aggravates it — they
live in conditions of even more acute poverty and are at higher
risk of violence than the general population.

Deportees are in equally desperate need of reintegration
assistance, without which they will risk their lives and
freedom to make a return journey. They are especially
vulnerable to extortion, recruitment or revenge by the
organized-crime groups or gangs they sought to escape. Those
deported at the border return more destitute for having
invested in a failed voyage. More established migrants who are
forcibly returned lose access to income that sustained their
families back home. They are deeply traumatized, face social
stigmatization upon return and join the ranks of the
informal economy. An unskilled Guatemalan deportee, making his
way back to the United States a few weeks ago, said: “I have
nothing to lose, I have no profession, no education, no hope.
Going to prison is a risk I am willing to take.”

Finally, imagining Central American governments excitedly
collaborating in deterring migration by addressing its root
causes was a pipe dream. Those countries have historically been
indifferent to the plight of their poor. Migration lets them
off the hook and is good business to boot, with remittances
contributing roughly 15 percent of Central America’s gross
domestic product.

Their contributions to the project are at mixed at best.
Honduras and El Salvador are, at least, investing in poverty
alleviation and gang prevention projects, while Guatemala is
failing to do much of anything. At the same time, both Honduras
and Guatemala have become increasingly corrupt, authoritarian
and overwhelmed by organized crime. The security and democracy
aspirations of the assistance strategy have gone largely unmet
and are contributing to a new wave of migrants fleeing
political persecution.

The solutions aren’t obvious or easy. If the United States
wants to demand more from the region, it needs to lead by
example. Rather than waste millions on border walls and
military deployments, it needs to dedicate greater assistance
to the region in a manner that enhances the welfare of marginal
communities and builds a strong and independent judiciary that
guarantees citizen security. Furthermore, by failing to use its
substantial leverage in the region to prevent democratic
regression, the United States is exacerbating rather than
stemming the causes of migration.

It is difficult to envision the president following such a
course, which is also a shame. The strategy offers a welcome
comprehensive response to reducing pressures to migrate, and
both its major pitfalls and potential remedies are apparent.
Trump could succeed where his predecessors fell short in
regulating undocumented migration. And he could do so with
bipartisan support in Congress.
