Policy vp Richard Allan addressed a landmark fake news and
disinformation inquiry in the British parliament in London.

A top Facebook policy executive on Tuesday told a U.K.
parliamentary committee looking into fake news and
disinformation that the actions of Cambridge Analytica app
developers to gain access to data from Facebook users before
the 2016 U.S. presidential election had undermined trust in the
social media giant.

"I'm not going to disagree with you that we've damaged public
trust by some of the actions we've taken," Richard Allan, the
social media giant's vp of policy solutions for Europe, the
Middle East and Africa, told an "international grand committee
on disinformation and fake news" in London that involved
parliamentarians from the U.K., Ireland, Canada, Argentina,
Brazil, Latvia and Singapore.

The committee, part of an ongoing inquiry by the British House
of Commons' Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee into
disinformation and fake news, had invited Facebook chairman and
CEO Mark Zuckerberg to appear at the hearing. But Zuckerberg
declined to attend after earlier apologizing for the Cambridge
Analytica scandal to members of the European Parliament.

Canadian member of parliament Charlie Angus joined the chorus
of disappointment over Zuckerberg's absence, which he insisted
amounted to "blowing off this committee." The organizers of the
event even left the front chair empty, and a "Mark Zuckerberg"
nameplate in front of it, to represent the Facebook chief. Last
week the committee argued that it "still believes Mark
Zuckerberg is the appropriate person to answer important
questions about data privacy, safety, security and sharing."

Allan, who is himself a former member of the U.K. parliament,
admitted that it was “not great” in terms of appearances that
Zuckerberg did not show up to the hearing. Angus at one point
told Allan that "while we were playing on our phones and apps,
our democratic institutions...seem to have been upended by frat
boy billionaires from California."

Cambridge Analytica before the 2016 U.S. election used
information from Facebook and others to build psychological
profiles of American voters, with, among other things, an app
that appeared to be a personality test. The app collected data
on tens of millions of people and their Facebook friends, even
those who did not download the app themselves.

Allan conceded that Facebook had been undermined by the
Cambridge Analytica scandal and other revelations, including
the social media giant hiring a Republican opposition firm,
Definers Public Affairs, to investigate billionaire George
Soros.

British parliamentarian Ian Lucas told Allan that “Facebook has
told us a tissue of lies about the way it operates,” alleging
that the social media giant knew “throughout” that Cambridge
Analytica developers had been harvesting data and only
intervened when those efforts were made public.

Allan's appearance was preceded by revelations in The
Guardian that the British parliament recently used its legal
powers to seize a number of Facebook internal documents that
allegedly discuss data and privacy decisions that may have led
to the Cambridge Analytica scandal.

The U.K. media report claimed the cache of internal papers
includes communications between senior Facebook executives and
Zuckerberg. Damian Collins, the chair of the parliamentary
committee, told Allan that the seized Facebook documents and
emails would not be made public on Tuesday. But he called
Allan's attention to one email from a Facebook engineer that in
October 2014 reported heavy Russian activity.

"If Russian IP addresses were pulling down a huge amount of
information from the platform, was that reported or, as so
often, was it kept within the family?" Collins asked. Allan,
while not addressing the Facebook engineer claim or Collins'
question directly, responded, "Those documents are at best
partial and at worst misleading."

Allan also insisted that Facebook had nothing to hide, but
rejected the idea that "internal discussions" be made public.
He told the parliamentary committee that Facebook was
continually attempting to refine the controls used by its users
to protect personal data and privacy. "Our intention is you
should not be surprised by the way your data is used," he said.
"It's not a good outcome if you are."
