The war in Yemen has been a disaster for U.S. interests,
for Saudi interests, and above all for the Yemeni people. It
has sparked the world’s largest humanitarian catastrophe: tens
of thousands of civilians have been killed and 14 million
people are at risk of starvation. It has been a strategic
blunder as well, producing the exact results the Saudi-led
military campaign was designed to prevent. The Houthis are more
militarily sophisticated and better able to strike beyond
Yemen’s borders than they were at the start of the war;
Iranian influence has expanded; and the relationship
between the Houthis and Lebanon’s Hezbollah has only deepened.
Although the United Arab Emirates has waged an effective battle
against al Qaeda in Yemen, terrorism remains a grave threat.

For three and a half years, Saudi Arabia has insisted, with
diminishing credibility, that military victory was imminent;
and for just as long, the United States and other powers have
largely turned a blind eye to the intervention’s consequences.
But the murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi
consulate in Istanbul in October has focused the world’s
attention on the kingdom’s reckless conduct—including its
disastrous war in Yemen.

However belatedly, in October 2018, Mike Pompeo, U.S. secretary
of state, and James Mattis, U.S. secretary of defense, both
called for an end to the fighting and publicly expressed
support for peace talks proposed by the United Nations. But to
bring a complex war such as Yemen’s to a cease-fire through
talks will take time, during which the country’s agony and the
strategic crisis in the Gulf will only deepen.

There is only one expeditious way for Saudi Arabia to end this
counterproductive war, and that is to stop its military
campaign unilaterally and challenge the Houthis to respond in
kind. Doing so will not end all of the fighting inside Yemen.
But it will create the conditions necessary for peace talks to
gain traction and for Yemeni leaders, supported by regional and
international partners, to address the country’s domestic
troubles and the growing influence of Iran. The United States
should lead an alliance of powers in pushing Saudi Arabia to
move first, rather than letting it drag out talks as the war
rages on.

There is only one way for Saudi Arabia to end this
counterproductive war, and that is to stop its military
campaign unilaterally and challenge the Houthis to respond in
kind.

JAW-JAW WON’T STOP WAR-WAR

Charged with the difficult task of getting meaningful peace
talks off the ground, Martin Griffiths, the UN special envoy
for Yemen since February 2018, has focused his efforts on
several fronts at once. He seeks to secure humanitarian access
to the Red Sea port of Hodeidah, through which more than 70
percent of Yemen’s imports flow. At the same time, Griffiths is
seeking to persuade the Saudi-led coalition to refrain from air
strikes in response to Houthi restraint from cross-border
missile and rocket attacks. The envoy is working to build
confidence on both sides through steps such as prisoner
exchanges, and he is leading political talks addressing
transitional arrangements and the threat of southern secession.

Griffiths’ approach seems sensible. Leaders on both sides can
more easily accept (and the UN can more easily monitor) a quid
pro quo cessation of Houthi missile strikes and Saudi air
strikes than a comprehensive cease-fire. Griffiths is wise to
begin political discussions without waiting for a cessation of
hostilities or an answer to the “who goes first” question.
Further, he has set forward his agenda for Yemen at exactly the
moment the United States was most receptive. He seems to have
won support from Trump administration officials during his
recent consultations in Washington, including one with Mattis
just days before the secretary of defense announced his support
for peace talks at the Manama Dialogue, an annual high-profile
security forum in Bahrain, sponsored by the International
Institute for Strategic Studies.

But the problem with Griffiths’ step-by-step negotiation
strategy is that it will take too long. In Yemen, a
catastrophic war drags on, and nearly half the population faces
a potential famine. This is no time for bickering, yet
bickering is precisely what Griffiths’ process is likely to
invite. That is in part because any of the belligerents could
hold the negotiations hostage to unreasonable demands; and
attempts to negotiate a cease-fire could easily get tangled up
with the question of transitional leadership.

A fighter jumps off a truck on the road between Sana'a and
Marib in Yemen, June 25, 2012

Khaled Abdullah Ali Al Mahdi / REUTERS

A fighter jumps off a truck on the road between Sana'a and
Marib in Yemen, June 25, 2012

Unpopular and in poor health, Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, the
president of Yemen, is widely considered dispensable. He knows
that his patrons—Saudi Arabia and the United States—would
happily trade him for a solution to the conflict, and this
knowledge makes him a difficult and paranoid negotiator. But
replacing Hadi will be complicated. His vice president, General
Ali Mohsen, is hated by the Houthis for his role in the brutal
wars against them from 2004 to 2009 and distrusted by the
Emiratis for being a member of Islah, Yemen’s Muslim
Brotherhood party. Without an obvious candidate for
transitional leadership who could win support of a broad
spectrum of Yemenis and their outside patrons, conditioning a
cease-fire on a succession agreement prolongs the fighting.

THE ROAD TO PEACE RUNS THROUGH RIYADH

Unilaterally ending its military campaign would serve Riyadh’s
interests as much as it would everyone else’s. Not only would
such a halt stanch the bloodshed in Yemen, it could slow or
stop the slide in Saudi Arabia’s global reputation. If Saudi
Arabia waits to end the conflict through talks aimed at a
cease-fire, the Houthis may decide that the kingdom loses more
in a continuation of hostilities than they do. The Houthis
could gain the upper hand in negotiations and hold them hostage
by making unreasonable demands on the Saudis.

Yet the Saudis do not seem to be moving in this direction. They
answered the calls for peace from Pompeo and Mattis with more
air strikes. The Trump administration’s November cessation of
midair refueling of Saudi-coalition flights does not seem to
have changed Saudi calculations. Clearly, the United States
needs other means to persuade them. There have been
frequent calls to suspend arms sales to Riyadh. But Bruce
Riedel, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, has
pointed out that suspending the sale of military spare parts to
Saudi Arabia would quickly ground the Saudi air force and be
more effective. The U.S. Congress is currently willing to take
punitive actions against Saudi Arabia, and the Trump
administration can use this as leverage.

A unilateral Saudi cessation is risky. The Houthis—who sparked
the war with their military takeover in 2014—would undoubtedly
exploit it to trumpet the victory of their “resistance” against
the greater firepower unleashed against them. And there is a
chance this could be construed as a victory for Iran. Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates exaggerated the degree of
Iranian influence on the Houthis at the beginning of the war as
part of their justification for intervening. But today, even
though the Houthis are still not quite a subsidiary of Iran in
the same way as, say, Hezbollah in Lebanon, Iranian influence
in Yemen has grown significantly.

The threat of expanding Iranian influence is not a reason to
delay a cease-fire.

The threat of expanding Iranian influence is not a reason to
delay a cease-fire, however. While ending the war unilaterally
and focusing on UN-sponsored political talks will not eliminate
Iranian influence, such steps could halt its expansion. A
drawn-out war in Yemen, on the other hand, will only produce
the same result as the wars in Iraq and Lebanon: a permanently
entrenched Iranian presence that operates through military
proxies and is eventually able to direct domestic policy.

A Saudi cease-fire is not a panacea. There is no guarantee that
the Houthis would respond by agreeing to share power with
Saudi-backed Yemeni leaders or that the south would stop trying
to secede. Lower-level domestic fighting would likely continue,
even if the Saudi-Houthi war ends. But Saudi Arabia stands to
benefit from ceasing its military operations even if the
Houthis respond by continuing to fire missiles across the
border: the role reversal would be in the Saudis’ favor. The
world would turn its attention to the Houthis as the aggressors
and spoilers, and Saudi self-defense would be widely
tolerated.

AFTER THE FIGHTING STOPS

Yemen’s war has deep roots in a politics laced with distrust.
From 2004 until his ouster in November 2011, former Yemeni
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, backed by Saudi Arabia,
instigated multiple military campaigns against Ansar Allah, the
Houthis’ political movement. Saleh promised quick victories but
was repeatedly undercut by surprisingly strong Houthi
resistance, foreshadowing the Saudis’ fate in the current war.

In 2011, the Houthis participated in popular protests against
Saleh, convincing the Gulf Cooperation Council
countries—concerned with maintaining stability—that he had to
go. The GCC, with strong encouragement from the United States,
helped nudge Saleh aside in favor of Hadi, his vice president
at the time. Hadi took control of a transitional government
that eventually morphed into the internationally recognized but
virtually powerless one he leads today.

The UN convened a 2013–14 conference charged with ending the
transition period and reaching agreements on elections and
power sharing. The Houthis were wary participants, and since
then it has become clear that the Houthi delegation either
failed to negotiate in good faith or never had the support of
its political leadership. In September 2014, the Houthis
exploited the opportunity of popular demonstrations against
fuel prices to seize power by force. In February 2015, they
fully occupied Sanaa. Saleh, the Houthis’ former adversary,
provided critical assistance in this effort. Probably nursing a
grudge from having been pushed aside in favor of Hadi in 2011,
Saleh infuriated his former Saudi patrons by aligning himself
and armed forces loyal to him with the Houthis, whom he had
demonized and fruitlessly pummeled, with Saudi help, for years.
(Saleh, in turn, was killed by the Houthis in December 2017
when he tried to switch sides again and join the Saudi fight
against the Houthis.)

The avowed purpose of the Saudi-led military campaign that
began in March 2015 was to restore the internationally
recognized, but now exiled, Hadi government to Sanaa. The
United Kingdom and the United States pushed a resolution that
provided cover to Saudi Arabia through the UN Security Council
(Russia, presciently, abstained). Resolution 2216 demanded that
the Houthis “immediately and unconditionally” withdraw their
forces from all areas they had captured; relinquish arms seized
from the state; and “cease all actions that are exclusively
within the authority of the legitimate Government of Yemen.”

Resolution 2216 demanded something close to unconditional
surrender from a movement that had repeatedly proven its
military resilience. Rather than providing a formula for a
negotiated end to the conflict, Resolution 2216 became an
unhelpful litmus test in Saudi and Emirati hands: if a UN
envoy, for example, did not sufficiently emphasize the terms of
the resolution, the Saudis and Emiratis would darkly hint that
he or she held Houthi sympathies. If an envoy did emphasize the
terms of 2216, on the other hand, it would play into Houthi
suspicions and provoke Houthi boycotts of UN meetings. If Saudi
Arabia decides to endits military operations, the Security
Council should pass a new resolution in support of that
decision, which would provide Griffiths and his UN team with a
more realistic mandate for talks.

CUTTING LOSSES

After three and a half years, the Saudi-led coalition’s goals
remain elusive, while conditions on the ground deteriorate: the
humanitarian situation is worsening, disease is spreading, the
Houthis are more entrenched than ever, and Iranian influence
has grown. Yemen desperately needs good-faith negotiations on
long-term political and security arrangements. Support from
Pompeo and Mattis for UN-sponsored political talks is a welcome
development.

But negotiations will not outpace the coming humanitarian
calamity or distract the world from Saudi Arabia’s questionable
conduct in this war. The security risks to Saudi Arabia from an
increasingly sophisticated Hezbollah-like militia and growing
Iranian military presence just across the Saudi border are
clear and become more acute as the war continues. A unilateral
Saudi cease-fire will save lives and could change the narrative
of the war to focus on these very real threats. But Saudi
Arabia is unlikely to make this move unless the United States
demonstrates to it that continuing the war will come at a cost
to the relationship between the two countries.
