The letter, containing all the signatures, will be sent to Sens.
Mitch McConnell and Chuck Schumer on Tuesday.

More than 50 prominent figures and former officials have signed
a letter urging Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
(R-KY) and his colleagues to end America’s involvement in the
Saudi-led war in Yemen.

The signatories — including two former US ambassadors to Yemen,
leading legal scholars, top Saudi Arabia experts, a Nobel Peace
Laureate, a former key aide for Secretary of State Colin
Powell, and MIT linguist Noam Chomsky — want McConnell and
other senators to support a bill that could forever remove US
troops from the Yemen war, which will likely be put to a vote
on Wednesday.

“Directing the President to halt all offensive activities
alongside Saudi Arabia against the Houthis unless such actions
are first approved by Congress ... would spell the likely end
to the broader conflict,” reads a copy of the letter obtained
by Vox, which is due to be delivered to Senate leadership on
Tuesday.

The lead authors of the letter, legal experts Bruce Ackerman
and Laurence Tribe and former US ambassadors to Yemen Barbara
Bodine and Stephen Seche, argue that Trump’s support for the
war is unauthorized by Congress and therefore illegal. Ackerman
and Tribe advise the Congressional Progressive Caucus which
has pushed the Senate and House hard to end America’s role in
the Yemen war.

They support a bill co-sponsored by Sens. Bernie Sanders
(I-VT), Mike Lee (R-UT), and Chris Murphy (D-CT) that would
force President Donald Trump to stop backing Saudi Arabia, the
UAE, and other coalition members in their fight against the
Houthi rebels within 30 days. Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY),
the top Democrat in the chamber, is facing pressure from
activist groups like MoveOn to co-sponsor the bill.

If Trump wants to recommit troops to the war, he would then
have to seek authorization from Congress to do so. The US helps
the Saudi-led coalition by providing them with intelligence,
selling them arms and ammunition, and until recently fueling
planes in the conflict that has left tens of thousands
dead, and millions more suffering from starvation and disease.

The bipartisan bill invokes the War Powers Resolution of
1973 (WPR), which states that if US troops are involved in
“hostilities” abroad “without a declaration of war or specific
statutory authorization, such forces shall be removed by the
President if the Congress so directs by concurrent resolution.”

“Successive administrations have basically defined the word
‘hostilities’ out of existence, and so Sen. Sanders believes
it’s important that Congress reasserts itself and engages in a
more open and robust debate about where, when, and how our
nation fights in war,” a Sanders aide told me.

The WPR also allows a simple majority in Congress to strike
down any military action, which means it would pass with a
51-49 vote.

In March, the same bill failed in a 55-44 vote. But if the
bipartisan bill passes this week, it would be the first time in
US history that the Senate voted to say America’s involvement
in a war was unconstitutional.

It’s very likely that a similar House bill, also based on
the WPR, would then pass in January when the Democrats take
over. At that point, Trump does have the ability to veto the
measures — but it could prove politically costly to do so.
Follow-up congressional action and lawsuits would almost
assuredly take place, as it would appear that Trump aimed to
expressly defy a mandate from lawmakers.

What to watch for ahead of, during, and after the vote

There are a few things to watch for related to this week’s
vote.

First, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Defense Secretary Jim
Mattis will brief all senators in a classified setting on
Wednesday morning about America’s involvement in the conflict
in Yemen. Two congressional sources told me that McConnell
specifically asked for the briefing ahead of the vote because
he was “concerned” that the Sanders resolution would pass. One
of those sources said the White House asked McConnell to
request the briefing. A spokesperson for McConnell acknowledged
the briefing but wouldn’t comment on anything else.

It’s therefore possible that the briefing will compel
Republicans to vote as a bloc against the measure.

However, some high-level Republicans may vote for the
Sanders-backed bill. The one to watch is Sen. Joni Ernst
(R-IA), who recently became a member of Republican Senate
leadership. Over the weekend she rebuked Trump by saying
the president has been too soft on Saudi Arabia both for its
war in Yemen and for the murder of journalist and dissident
Jamal Khashoggi in October. It’d be jarring to see a top
Senate Republican openly defy not only Trump but also
McConnell.

And finally, it’ll be important to watch how Trump reacts if
both the Senate and House pass their bills to end America’s
participation in the Yemen war. Trump could veto both bills but
he would certainly face an open congressional revolt. At that
point, the situation could turn into a crisis as lawmakers seek
to assert their ability to authorize America’s wars.

Still, this week could show just how dissatisfied Congress
really is with the Yemen war and America’s relationship with
Saudi Arabia as a whole — and how Trump has handled both.
