Enough is enough. End the war in Yemen.

Tawakkol Karman is a Nobel Peace Prize laureate.

Today, the Yemeni people are suffering from the actions of
outsiders. Regional powers have turned the country into an
arena for proxy conflicts that have little to do with the
actual interests of the Yemeni nation. Large parts of the
country have been devastated, including much of its vital
infrastructure. Millions are threatened by starvation
and disease. The fighting has left tens of thousands of others
dead or wounded.

This appalling tragedy should have never been allowed to
happen. In March 2015, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, and their regional and international allies
(including the United States and the U.K.) decided to
intervene militarily in Yemen. They were responding to the 2014
coup d’etat staged by the Iranian-backed Houthi militias, who
overthrew the internationally approved and democratically
legitimized transitional government.

The United Nations Security Council has unanimously condemned
the Houthi power grab, as shown by the two resolutions
(2201 and 2216) it subsequently passed. Resolution 2216
authorized the Arab Coalition to inspect vessels inbound to
Yemen and to seize any arms shipments discovered.

Since then, the members of the coalition have expanded their
military involvement far beyond this original mandate.
Exploiting their control of the air, they have conducted
airstrikes that wreaked widespread damage and killed countless
civilians. Instead of reestablishing a unified Yemeni army
under national command, they have formed militias loyal to
their own governments in the territories liberated from the
Houthis, completely bypassing the legitimate government on
whose behalf they claim to be waging the war. Though about 80
percent of Yemeni territory is now free from Houthi
control, President Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi is still outside the
country. He has spent most of the past four years in Riyadh,
where he is being held under conditions approximating house
arrest. He has not been allowed to return to the territories
restored by the coalition, let alone Sanaa.

Since this futile and disastrous war began in 2014, neither the
Security Council nor the western backers of the coalition have
troubled to question the logic of the conflict. Why have the
Saudis and their allies refused to allow the legitimate
government to return to the liberated territories? Why all
these massacres against civilians — in markets, refugee camps
and hospitals, at wedding and funeral ceremonies, in
schools and civilian neighborhoods? Why has the country
been under air, land and naval blockade all this time? Why have
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, two of the
wealthiest countries in the world, allowed this humanitarian
crisis to continue?

Saudi Arabia has blocked Yemenis from leaving or entering
Yemen. Instead of receiving Yemenis and treating them well,
it has deported tens of thousands of workers and
businesspeople who sustained millions of others.

It is hard to escape drawing a comparison between the Saudis’
brutal prosecution of the war in Yemen and their horrific
murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi. The Saudi regime
commits its crimes with extraordinary brazenness and then does
everything it can to dodge responsibility. When held to
account, Saudi leaders shift the blame to scapegoats and away
from those who are truly responsible.

For all its horror, Khashoggi’s killing has at least encouraged
a new global awareness about the nature of the Saudi regime —
and renewed attention to the forgotten war in my country. Now
there is a genuine cause for hope that this awakening, though
far too late, will create fresh momentum for an end to the war
and bring Yemenis back to the political process. Just this
week, there have been signs that the warring parties are
willing to consider a new round of talks.

The path to ending the war is clear. First, the United States
and other countries must cease arms exports to Saudi Arabia
and the UAE. The Security Council should pass a resolution
demanding an immediate end to the war and compelling the Saudis
and Emiratis to withdraw from Yemen. The United Nations must
sponsor a political process that begins by obligating all
parties to the conflict to disarm their militias.

This will allow Yemen to resume the political process that was
disrupted by the coup. The United Nations should oversee the
formation of government of national unity that will organize a
referendum on the draft constitution and prepare for fresh
elections. It is crucial to establish a national reconciliation
commission responsible for providing redress to victims of the
war. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates must be held
accountable and compensate Yemen for the damages they have
caused.

The Saudis, the Emiratis and their allies are not the only ones
responsible for the tragedy in Yemen. The Houthis, too, must be
compelled to cease their destructive behavior. They must be
prevented from receiving any weapons and other support from
Iran. They are an extremist group that is deeply hostile to
civic values, and they have committed countless human rights
violations and crimes. They believe in a theocratic ideology
that grants them a divine and exclusive right to rule.

Saudi Arabia, the UAE and the Houthis must be told with one
voice: Enough is enough.
