Juul Labs' e-cigarette flavored pods. Each pod delivers around
200 puffs, with a 5 percent nicotine weight, and is available
to purchase in packs of four.

E-cigarette manufacturer Juul will stop selling fruity flavors
like mango and cucumber from brick-and-mortar stores in
response to the Food and Drug Administration's request to
curb "epidemic" levels of teen vaping, according to a person
briefed on the company's plan.

Juul will pull its mango, cucumber, fruit and creme flavored
nicotine pods from convenience store and other retailers, said
the person, who asked not to be named because the proposal is
not yet public. The company plans to restrict most of its sales
to its online shop, the person said. It wasn't immediately
clear whether Juul would also stop selling its popular flavored
pods in vape shops.

These flavors have drawn criticism from parents, teachers and
regulators who say they attract kids to the products. Virginia
tobacco, classic tobacco, menthol and mint, flavors closely
aligned with traditional smoking, will remain on shelves.

Juul will continue to sell all of its flavors on its website,
which uses age-verification technology to block people under
the age of 21 from buying its products, this person said. It's
not immediately clear when the flavored products would be
removed from store shelves.

show chapters

Banning e-cigs from convenience stores could drive smokers
to tobacco products, expert says

Banning e-cigs from convenience stores could drive smokers to
tobacco products, expert says    2:53 PM ET Fri, 9 Nov 2018 |
04:42

The company declined to comment. The Wall Street Journal first
reported news of the plan.

Separately, the FDA plans to announce next week new
restrictions on the sales of flavored cartridge-based
e-cigarettes in convenience stores and gas stations, allowing
them to be sold only in vape and tobacco shops that tend to
enforce age restrictions better, according to senior FDA
officials, who asked not to be named because the proposal is
not yet public.

Menthol vapor products will still be allowed to be sold in
convenience stores and gas stations — for now. The FDA plans to
eventually remove menthol cigarettes and e-cigarettes entirely
from the market.

The FDA also plans to ban online sales until manufacturers
implement FDA-mandated guidelines for age verification, the FDA
officials said.

Juul has come under fire as anecdotal reports indicate teens
are using its products and preliminary federal data shows a
more than 75 percent surge in high school students who are
using e-cigarettes. The clear market leader, Juul has captured
about 75 percent of the e-cigarette market, according to
Nielsen data compiled by Wells Fargo analyst Bonnie Herzog.

FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb in September gave five
e-cigarette manufacturers — Juul, British American
Tobacco's Vuse, Altria's MarkTen, Imperial Brands' Blu
E-cigs and Japan Tobacco's Logic — until Sunday to submit
proposals on how to prevent youth e-cigarette use.

Altria has already said it will remove its MarkTen pod-based
products and will stop selling all flavors except for menthol
or tobacco in its cig-a-like products until the FDA reviews and
approves them. Other e-cigarette manufacturers are expected to
soon make public their proposals to the FDA, with the 60-day
mark falling on Sunday.
