A person smokes a Juul Labs e-cigarette in this arranged
photograph taken in the Brooklyn, New York.

Juul said it will stop selling most of its flavored nicotine
pods for its e-cigarettes in retail stores — though only
temporarily — as it tries to appease federal regulators who
have ordered the company to help reduce "epidemic" levels of
teen use.

The company on Tuesday stopped accepting retail orders for its
mango, fruit, creme and cucumber pods to the more than 90,000
convenience stores, vape shops and other retailers that sell
them, CEO Kevin Burns said in a blog post on the company's
website. Consumers will still be able to buy all of Juul's
flavors on its website and its four tobacco and
menthol-flavored pods in retail stores, Burns said.

The company plans to resume sales to retailers that adopt the
company's new age restrictions and verification system. Juul is
also banning sales to anyone under 21, even in states where the
legal age is lower. Additionally, Burns said the company will
more intensely police individual retailers by increasing its
secret shopper visits from 500 to about 2,000 per month.

The new policy doesn't go as far as expected. A person briefed
on the company's plan told CNBC last week that Juul would
stop all retail sales of flavored pods. There was no mention of
resuming sales at any point. It's unclear when sales could
resume.

Burns also said the company won't sell flavored pods to
retailers that aren't legally allowed to sell them to the
public, leaving the door open if federal regulators follow
through on plans to restrict those sales to vape shops.



The Food and Drug Administration this week plans to
restrict sales of cartridge-based flavored e-cigarettes to
places such as vape and tobacco shops, senior administration
officials have told CNBC.

Retailers that want to sell the sweeter flavors will need to
comply with Juul's new distribution system and age
restrictions. Clerks must electronically scan IDs and verify
consumers are older than 21, regardless of local laws. The sale
quantity will also be limited to prevent bulk purchases.

The company is also curbing some of its marketing practices,
Burns said. Juul will shut down its Facebook and Instagram
accounts and end promotional activity on Twitter, using it only
for "non-promotional" communications, Burns said. The company
has never used Snapchat. It will also use its YouTube account
only to show former adult smokers' testimonials. Juul already
works with Instagram and Facebook to scrape inappropriate
content, including images and videos of teenagers using its
products.

Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb in
a tweet said "voluntary action is no substitute for regulatory
steps" the agency will soon take, but he wants to recognize
Juul's actions and encourage others to take actions to reverse
youth use.

Gottlieb tweet

Juul is already dominating the e-cigarette industry, just three
years since its popular nicotine pods hit the market. The
company, valued at $16 billion, captured 75 percent of the
market in the period ended Nov. 3, according to Nielsen data
compiled by Wells Fargo analyst Bonnie Herzog.

But the e-cigarette's appeal among teenagers has undermined
Juul's success and threatened its future.

After months of parents and lawmakers begging the FDA to do
something, Gottlieb in September ordered Juul and four
other e-cigarette makers to fix what he labeled "epidemic"
levels of teens using e-cigarettes. He said preliminary federal
data show a more than 75 percent surge in high school students
regularly using e-cigarettes.

That means roughly 3 million, or about 20 percent of high
school kids, are using e-cigarettes, up from 1.73 million, or
11.7 percent in last year's National Youth Tobacco Survey. The
complete data set is expected to be published this month.

"We're in alignment with  that we need to take action
and we need to get this category in a better position," Burns
told CNBC in an October interview. The company declined to make
Burns available for an interview Tuesday.

This week, the FDA will release its own proposal, which
includes restricting sales of cartridge-based flavored
e-cigarettes to places such as vape and tobacco shops that tend
to enforce age restrictions better, senior FDA officials told
CNBC last week. The agency also plans to ban online sales until
manufacturers implement FDA-mandated guidelines for age
verification, said the FDA officials, who asked not to be named
because the proposal is not yet public.

Some other e-cigarette makers have publicly shared their plans
to cooperate with the FDA. Altria said it will voluntarily
remove its MarkTen pod-based products and will stop selling all
flavors except for menthol or tobacco in its "cig-a-like"
products until the FDA reviews and approves them. The company
said it also supports federal legislation to make 21 the
minimum age to buy tobacco products.

Fontem Ventures, a unit of tobacco company Imperial Brands
and maker of blu e-cigarettes, said it will raise the minimum
age requirements to buy pods on its website to 21 across the
U.S. and review its packaging and product descriptions.

British American Tobacco, which makes Vuse e-cigarettes,
will establish and enforce contractual penalties for retail
partners that sell tobacco products to minors, a spokesman said
in an email to CNBC on Tuesday. It will create a secret shopper
program to check compliance and establish an enforcement
monitoring program.

BAT, along with Altria and Juul, said they support raising the
minimum tobacco buying age to 21. Fontem Ventures said it will
support raising the age for online purchases.

Japan Tobacco International, which makes Logic
e-cigarettes, has not made its plan public. A spokesman did not
immediately respond to CNBC's request for comment.
