The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) plans to ban the sale
of flavored e-cigarettes as early as next week, senior agency
officials told the Washington Post yesterday (Nov. 8).

Back in September, the FDA gave Juul Labs and four other
e-cigarette brands an ultimatum: They had 60 days to prove they
could keep their products away from minors, or else risk
being pulled from the market. That grace period ends Nov. 11,
and reports indicate that the FDA has already made up its mind.
(In an email to Quartz on Nov. 9, an FDA spokesperson said the
agency has no information to share at the time.)

Senior FDA officials told the Post and other news outlets
that the agency will prohibit the sale of most flavored
e-cigarettes in convenience stores and gas stations across the
country. In addition, online retailers will only be able to
sell flavored vapes if they enact age-verification
requirements set out by the federal agency. FDA commissioner
Scott Gottlieb is expected to make these announcements next
week. (Juul already has plans to pull its mango-,
cucumber-, crème-, and other fruit-flavored nicotine pods from
these brick-and-mortar stores, CNBC reports.)

But there is an exception: mint and menthol flavors.
Convenience stores and gas stations will still be able to sell
e-cig cartridges in these flavors because menthol is still
permitted in normal cigarettes, and there are concerns that
users of mint-flavored e-cigs might switch to regular
tobacco cigarettes instead. However, the FDA is reportedly
considering banning regular menthol cigarettes, and if
teenage vaping doesn’t decline, mint- and menthol-flavored
e-cigarettes as well.

“We know that the flavors play an important role in driving the
youth appeal,” Gottlieb said in a statement earlier this
year. Research has found that sweet flavors, in particular, are
more likely to get teens hooked. In fact, a study
published in July, led by researchers at the Yale University
School of Medicine, found that teenagers preferred
sweet-flavored e-cigarettes with no nicotine over e-cigs with
nicotine but no sweetness.

E-cigarette proponents argue that vapes are an important tool
in helping adult smokers quit traditional cigarettes. A
report released by the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention on Nov. 8 found that cigarette use among US adults
is at a record low, although the authors credit smoke-free
policies and rising prices of tobacco products, and not the
rising popularity of vaping.

Teenage vaping has been the FDA’s primary concern for some time
now..In an interview with CNBC’s news program, “Squawk
Box,” Gottlieb cited yet-to-be-published FDA data
showing e-cigarette use among high-school and middle-school
kids rose 77% and 50%, respectively, from 2017 to 2018. That
translates to some 3.5 million minors who vaped at least
once in 2018. In April, the FDA launched an investigation
into Juul to determine if they were marketing to teens (the
results of which have not been released), and in September, it
sent more than a thousand letters to retailers warning them not
to sell e-cigarettes to minors, and issued 131 monetary
penalties to stores that did. If next week’s ban comes to pass,
it will be the US’s biggest crackdown on vapes yet.
