Mac Miller, the popular Pittsburgh rapper who died
in September at 26, suffered an accidental fatal overdose of
fentanyl, cocaine and alcohol, according to a toxicology report
released by the Los Angeles County Medical Examiner-Coroner
on Monday. The cause of death was listed as “mixed drug
toxicity.”

The involvement of fentanyl – a synthetic opiate estimated to
be over 50 times more powerful than heroin – puts Miller in the
company of other musicians like Prince, Tom Petty and
Lil Peep, all of whom died from an accidental overdose
involving the drug in recent years. A major component in the
growing opiate crisis across the US, fentanyl is often mixed
into black market supplies of cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine
and benzodiazepines.

Miller, born Malcolm James McCormick, had just released his
fifth full-length album, Swimming, near the time of his death.
The album opened at No. 3 on the Billboard chart, where Miller
had become a low-key fixture after years of online growth with
mixtapes and independent releases. Blue Slide Park, his first
LP, topped the charts in 2011, becoming the first independently
released album to do so in 16 years and setting him on a path
to stardom.

Miller died on September 7th at his home in California,
where he was found unresponsive and could not be revived. He
had spoken frequently in music and interviews about his
struggles with depression and substance abuse, and had been
charged with two counts of driving under the influence earlier
this year, following a car accident.

Representatives for Miller declined to comment on his cause of
death. Last week in Los Angeles, the rapper’s family and his
management team hosted Mac Miller: A Celebration of Life, a
benefit concert featuring friends and collaborators like
Earl Sweatshirt, Chance the Rapper and John Mayer.
Proceeds from the event went toward the founding of the Mac
Miller Circles Fund, which hopes to provide “programming,
resources, and opportunities to youth from underserved
communities, helping them recognise their full potential
through exploration in the arts and community building.”

Miller’s legacy was also invoked this weekend in a new song by
pop star Ariana Grande, a former girlfriend. In the track,
Thank U, Next, she sings: “Wish I could say thank you to
Malcolm/ ’cause he was an angel.” – New York Times
