One week before his death, Mac Miller was happy. On August
31st, the rapper invited the bassist Thundercat — a close
friend and collaborator — and his daughter, Sanaa, over to his
Studio City, California, home to spend the entire day
celebrating the girl’s 12th birthday. “He refused not to
celebrate it with us,” Thundercat recalls with a laugh. “He was
like, ‘What do I get her?’ ‘I dunno, some Gucci flip-flops?’ ”
Miller treated his guests to dinner, sang “Happy Birthday”
twice, and then retired to the couch, where the three friends
spent the rest of the night watching Sanaa’s favorite TV shows
— with Miller periodically stealing her phone and trolling her
Instagram and Snapchat feed. “The happiness was there, man,”
Thundercat says. “I could see it in him. And it wasn’t fake.”

It would be the last time Thundercat would see his friend
alive. On September 7th, shortly before noon, police officers
responded to a frantic 911 call placed by Miller’s personal
assistant and longtime sober coach, who discovered Miller’s
lifeless body in a bedroom in his sprawling, compound-like home
moments earlier. The 26-year-old rapper — who topped the charts
as an independent teenage artist and championed and befriended
many of hip-hop’s biggest talents, and whose career was defined
by a relentless desire to improve his craft — was pronounced
dead at the scene. According to an autopsy report released by
the Los Angeles County Coroner’s Office on November 5th, Miller
died of an accidental overdose. Fentanyl, cocaine and alcohol
were all present in his system. A bottle of alcohol and
prescription pills were found in his home, and a powdery white
substance was found on his person.

According to witness statements in the autopsy report, Miller
was last seen by his assistant around 10:30 p.m. on September
6th, and spoke to his mother on the phone that night. It was
only when the assistant arrived the next morning — he typically
woke Miller at 11:30 a.m. — and discovered Miller’s body that
anyone close to him knew anything was wrong.

Miller had long struggled with addiction. While he was
attempting sobriety, he had frequent “slip-ups,” according to a
statement in the autopsy report, that could be excessive. The
last such incident before the night of his death, according to
his assistant, had been on September 4th, just three days
before his death.

Miller openly discussed his dependence on lean, a combination
of codeine and promethazine. It peaked around the time he was
making his 2012 mixtape, Macadelic. “He had sort of made a turn
after the making of  Blue Slide Park,
where I think he got a little bit deeper into drugs and was
talking about it,” says Benjy Grinberg, the founder of
independent Pittsburgh record label, Rostrum Records, who
signed Miller to his first record deal in 2010 and served as
his de facto manager for several years afterward. “It was
definitely scary. I had never been that close to somebody who
had issues like that.”

But for those closest to him, Miller’s death still came as a
shock. By all accounts, he was in his best mental and physical
condition in years when he died. Miller had been working with
his sober coach since 2016, and was working out at an L.A. gym
nearly every day.

Two weeks before Miller’s death, Ty Dolla $ign, who was in the
midst of working with him on a joint project, spent the day
with Miller at Chalice Recording Studios in L.A. “He was in
good spirits,” says Ty, who first met the rapper through the
pair’s mutual friendship with Miller’s onetime Rostrum
labelmate Wiz Khalifa. “He had everybody in the room dying
laughing.” Miller also met Fifth Harmony member Dinah Jane for
the first time that day, “and she was talking about how nice he
was,” Ty remembers. “She didn’t think he was gonna be that
cool, but he was supercool. I’m like, ‘Yeah, man. That’s Mac.’
“

When he learned of Miller’s passing, via text message while on
tour in Tampa with G-Eazy and Lil Uzi Vert, Ty broke down. “I
went outside of my bus to try to catch a breather,” he says. “I
was crying. And I don’t ever cry. Nobody sees me down like
that. That was the hardest day ever. The first time I cried in
years.” When he heard the news, Ty quickly phoned Thundercat.
“I had to tell him the news and shit. He immediately broke
down. He was like, ‘The last thing he said was, “Bro, I just
want to make it to tour.” ‘ “

Thundercat and Miller had big plans for the rest of the year.
He and Miller were set to hit the road this fall on a joint
tour behind the rapper’s new album, Swimming, and, more
urgently, they had plans to shoot a bold music video in
mid-September for the collaborative track “What’s the Use?” A
wide-ranging cast of celebrities and friends of Miller’s, from
TV personality Guy Fieri to Kehlani and Mac DeMarco, were set
to make cameos dancing along to the song. “He just wanted
people to know how hard he’d been working,” Thundercat says.
“Up until the last words we spoke to each other, it was nothing
short of pure excitement.”
September 11, 2018 - Pittsburgh, PA, U.S. - 11 September 2018 -
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania - Hundreds of fans mourn the death of
rapper MAC MILLER at a public vigil held at Frick Parkâ€™s Blue
Slide playground which he named his 2011 debut album after.
Fans gathered to pay their respects at his childhood hangout
spot four days after news broke that he died at the age of 26
at his Los Angeles home. Photo Credit: Jason L. Nelson/AdMedia
(Credit Image: © Jason L. Nelson/AdMedia via ZUMA Wire)

Hundreds of fans mourn the death of rapper Mac Miller at a
public vigil held at Frick Park’s Blue Slide playground which
he named his 2011 debut album after. Photo credit: © Jason L.
Nelson/AdMedia/ZUMA

On a late-July afternoon this year in Manhattan, Miller met
with me for one of the first interviews he would give about
Swimming. It was one of the first times he’d been out in public
following his highly publicized breakup with Ariana Grande, a
tumultuous event made worse when, days later, Miller was
arrested on charges of DUI and hit-and-run after he allegedly
crashed his Mercedes SUV into a power pole near his home and
fled the scene. But Miller told me that, despite tabloid
headlines following his arrest that suggested he’d fallen back
into his drug-abusing ways, he’d learned to be the judge of his
own reality. He said he was in a good place.

“Don’t get me wrong — I record music like a fucking meth
addict,” he followed up with a laugh. “But these people
online thinking I’m super-fucked-up on drugs when I’m not. . .
. That’s not the worst thing in the world. It just doesn’t seem
that important to me.  How are you going to expect a bunch of
people who are just reading random headlines or hearing about a
DUI or assuming you’re in a superdark, depressed place to form
any other conclusions? I can’t expect that everyone is going to
be like, ‘Nah. Malcolm, he’s a good person.’ “

In the weeks leading up to this death, Miller did what he
always did to block out the noise: He worked on music. He was
already deep in rehearsals for his upcoming tour, which was set
to feature his dream band, including Thundercat. “He made me
want to get on my shit,” the bassist says. “Because I could see
it in him. It wasn’t him playing the game. It was him being 100
percent with it.”

“That’s the part that hurt the most,” the singer Miguel, who
collaborated with Miller on “Weekend,” one of the biggest hits
of their careers, says. “He had just put this incredible album
out. He was ready to go on tour with one of his really close
friends. There was a lot in the air. He was looking forward to
something new.”

Even after Swimming’s release, on August 3rd, and some of his
most positive reviews that came with it, Mac was already back
at work on new music. He’d been in the studio with producer
Frank Dukes, and he and Post Malone had plans to make an album
together. “Mac never stopped working on music from the moment I
met him up to and including the week he passed,” says his
longtime producer, Eric “E. Dan” Dan. The producer first met
Miller at his ID Labs Studio in Pittsburgh when the rapper was
releasing self-funded mixtapes, and Dan went on to work on
every one of Miller’s projects. “I don’t think you’ll find
anybody that would tell you he was anything but excited to go
on tour, happy to have an amazing and well-received album out
and looking forward to the future.”

On August 5th, Miller performed an intimate show at L.A’s Hotel
Café for a crowd of 100 or so close friends and family to
celebrate his album release. The 10-song set list that night
ran through the rapper’s music from the recent past and
concluded with “2009,” a string-swelling track off Swimming so
personal that the rapper had once felt self-conscious about
including it on the LP. “Now every day I wake up and breathe/I
don’t have it all, but that’s all right with me,” Miller sang
before walking offstage.

Waiting for him in the wings was Benjy Grinberg, one of his
earliest champions. Grinberg says he and Miller hadn’t spoken
much in recent years, but “when he came offstage that night he
gave me one of the nicest hugs I’ve ever received and continued
on to his green room,” Grinberg says. “It was a really nice
moment for me.” It was the last time he saw Miller: “Looking
back, I’m happy that I at least had the chance to see him in
person one more time.

“It still doesn’t feel real at all,” Grinberg adds. “I actually
had a dream last night that I was at his wedding and woke up
and was like, ‘Damn.’ Honestly, I still feel a bit numb.”

Long before he wanted to be a rapper, Miller, born Malcolm
James McCormick to a photographer mother and an architect
father, was a natural-born creative spirit. So inventive was a
young Mac that his older brother Miller would compare him to
the central character in the children’s show Harold and the
Purple Crayon. “He’s this kid who draws his own realities,” Mac
told me in July, describing the cartoon character. “I’ve always
been into that kinda stuff.”

He began rapping at age 14, making a name for himself on the
Pittsburgh freestyle scene first as EZ Mac, before rebranding
as Mac Miller. He connected with Grinberg and Rostrum A&R man
Artie Pitt — who were running the label, home to rising local
star Khalifa — while he was still a teen. Grinberg and Pitt
recall frequently running into Miller at E. Dan’s ID Labs. “He
was a go-getter and he knew what he wanted,” Pitt recalls of a
teenage Miller. “And that’s a big part of being a superstar,
being able to run your own ship. He had the vision for it. I
knew he was going to be that guy.”

With the release of his 2010 mixtape, K.I.D.S. (Kickin’
Incredibly Dope Shit), an 18-year-old Miller began attracting
national attention, thanks in part to the track “Kool Aid &
Frozen Pizza,” which sampled the Lord Finesse song “Hip 2 Da
Game.” (In 2012, Lord Finesse sued; he and Miller settled later
that year.) Miller’s early raps were juvenile, but sampling a
hip-hop legend like Finesse signaled to others that here was a
young man with a sincere respect and curiosity for hip-hop’s
storied legacy. “He could have chosen any beat he wanted,” DJ
A-Trak, who’d become friendly with Miller in the ensuing years,
says of “Kool Aid,” “but to choose something as dope in the
hip-hop sense as Lord Finesse is such a cool first
destination.”

The following year, Miller released his major-label debut, Blue
Slide Park. It was a massive commercial success, the first
independently distributed debut album to top the Billboard 200
since Tha Dogg Pound’s Dogg Food, in 1995. Critics universally
dismissed it, though, as insipid and unoriginal hip-hop. Miller
was easily slotted into a cadre of other current young white
rappers, like Asher Roth and Sammy Adams, and was derided as a
“frat rapper.”

“He was never a frat rapper,” Pitt argues. “The music was never
frat rap. Him and I had that conversation many times.” This
intense criticism, including an infamous 1.0 review for Blue
Slide Park on Pitchfork, took its toll, but it eventuallly
bolstered Miller’s creative ambition. He soon relocated to L.A.
and, first with 2012’s Macadelic and 2013’s Watching Movies
With the Sound Off, he began experimenting with inventive new
sounds as well as producing his own music, often under the
moniker Larry Fisherman. He also became a key fixture in the
L.A. rap scene, forming friendships and collaborating with
artists including Earl Sweatshirt, Vince Staples and Schoolboy
Q, in addition to more experimental, jazz-indebted musicians
like Thundercat and the psychedelic DJ-producer Flying Lotus.
March 6, 2016 - Okeechobee, Florida, U.S - Rapper MAC MILLER
and MIGUEL perform together during the Powow at the Okeechobee
Music Festival in Okeechobee, Florida (Credit Image: © Daniel
DeSlover/ZUMA Wire)

Mac Miller and Miguel perform together during the Powow at the
Okeechobee Music Festival in Okeechobee, Florida. Photo credit:
© Daniel DeSlover/ZUMA

“It’s awesome, man,” Miller told me in 2013. “All of us,
we’re all making music together, we all enjoy each other’s
music and push each other to do better. Personally, I think the
most talented people in music right now are the people coming
through my studio.”

That was also when the rapper began using harder drugs. Having
frequently accompanied him on the road, Pitt says he harbors
regret about this time in Miller’s life, and he has the sense
he could have done more to help. “I was always worried about
him at that time,” Pitt says. “I carry some guilt in my heart
even up until now. I do struggle with it a bit when I think
about it. I guess I always thought that it would be under
control.”

Miller’s drug use was reflected in the music. His jazzy 2013
mixtape, Faces, opens with the rapper pondering his own death:
“I shoulda died already, shit/Yeah, I shoulda died already/Came
in, I was high already.” On “God Speed,” one of the most
revealing tracks on his 2015 major-label debut, GO:OD AM, which
he released after signing a label deal with Warner Bros. worth
a reported $10 million, Miller raps, “White lines be numbing
them dark times/Them pills that I’m popping, I need to man
up/Admit it’s a problem/I need a wake-up/Before one morning I
don’t wake up.”

For Miller, music was a form of connection — to different
people, sounds and, often, himself. “That’s what’s most
important — I want the whole body of work to feel like it’s
me,” Miller said in July. “I speak through my music. So when
people say, ‘How’s he doing?’ I can just say, ‘Listen to the
music.’ That should be able to tell you.”

Mac’s trajectory was one of constant musical evolution, and
even after his initial reinvention from precocious party rap to
avant garde experimentation, he would switch course again.
2016’s Divine Feminine marked a third act to his artistic
career. It featured live instrumentation and funky grooves, was
easily his most beatific and optimistic work yet. It’s also
when he began singing more prominently on his albums. “My only
goal was to continue to get better,” he told Rolling Stone
that year. “That’s all I want to do.”

Swimming, released three months ago, was in the same sonic vein
as Divine Feminine, but it marked a step forward. It featured
some of the most wrenching and, at times, painfully sad lyrics
of his career. But its music, all orchestral swells and swishy
keyboards, felt like a clear and cohesive statement from an
artist more comfortable than ever in his ambition. And the
album’s diverse roster of collaborators, from John Mayer and
Blood Orange’s Dev Hynes to Jon Brion, were prime indicators of
the respect Miller had steadily earned from his peers. “Just
the pure artistic growth and achievement itself is
commendable,” A-Trak says. “Sure, early on some people didn’t
want to give him his due, but he persevered through that and
just kept his head down. You have to respect that.”

Since Miller’s death, the people who knew him have been eager
to share what kind of person he was. “He was always polite to
everybody,” Ty Dolla $ign says. “Spoke to everybody as soon as
he comes in the room. Would shake everybody’s hand. He was just
a supernice dude. Nobody that I know can say anything bad about
him.”

On of the most touching tributes came from Ariana Grande,
Miller’s ex-girlfriend, who took to Instagram to post a candid
video of him a week after his death. “i adored you from the day
i met you when i was nineteen and i always will,” she wrote.
“we talked about this. so many times. i’m so mad, i’m so sad i
don’t know what to do.” Grande would later reference Miller in
her latest single, the Billboard-topping “thank u, next.” “Wish
I could say, ‘Thank you’ to Malcolm,” she sings. “‘Cause he was
an angel.”

“Beyond helping me launch my career he was one of the sweetest
guys I ever knew,” Chance the Rapper wrote on Twitter. “Great
man. I loved him for real. I’m completely broken. God bless
him.” Mayer wrote on Instagram, “You gotta know that if you
weren’t familiar with Mac Miller, you were about to be, whether
you would have seen him at a festival, or a friend was going to
catch a show and tell everyone they knew about it (like I did.)
Mac put in the work.”

Elton John paid tribute to Miller on the opening show of his
farewell tour, in Allentown, Pennsylvania, the night after
Miller’s passing. The singer dedicated “Don’t Let the Sun Go
Down on Me” to the rapper. “Unbelievably, 26 years of age, and
passed away yesterday,” the legend said before launching into
one of his most recognized songs. “It’s inconceivable that
someone so young, and with so much talent, could do that.”

“He would’ve gotten a huge kick out of someone as random and
iconic as Elton John dedicating a song to him,” E. Dan says.

“It makes me happy that he got to put this last album out and
see how well-received it was,” he adds, “but incredibly sad
that I know he had so much more to say musically and would
continue to amaze us all.”

Miller was aware that, even as he was in the midst of creating
each of his artistic statements with his friends and peers, it
was he alone who was responsible for his overall legacy.

“You eventually realize you’re the only variable,” Miller said
a few weeks before he died. “The only difference is you. That’s
why you have to be that honest. You put so much of yourself
into what you do. Because in the end you’re the only thing
that’s different. You’re the only thing that sets it apart.”

“Who knows what the perception of me is at this point?” he
admitted to me in 2016. “To be honest, I don’t even know
anymore. For a while it was like, ‘Oh, he’s a rich white kid,’
which is false. Then it was ‘He’s a drug addict,’ which was up
for interpretation. At this point, I just want my music to be
it. Just go there. As time goes on, people may or may not get
the idea. But they don’t need to. All they need to do is
listen.”

“It’s been tough. Really tough,” Thundercat tells Rolling Stone
on a late-October afternoon. The bassist should be embarking on
the start of a world tour with his friend, but instead he’s
still emotionally reeling, six weeks after Miller’s passing.
“But I don’t want to shut out the world. Sometimes getting
together can help bring closure, or at least a bit of solace.”
A few days later, he did exactly that.
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA - OCTOBER 31: (L-R) Dylan Reynolds,
Chance the Rapper, Njomza, Miguel, J.I.D, Ty Dolla $ign, SZA,
Anderson .Paak, guest, John Mayer, guest, Karen Myers, David
Byrnes, Kelly Clancy, Mark McCormick, and Christian Clancy
onstage during "Mac Miller: A Celebration Of Life" Concert
Benefiting The Launch Of The Mac Miller Circles Fund at The
Greek Theatre on October 31, 2018 in Los Angeles, California.
(Photo by Kevin Winter/Getty Images for LiveNation)

Dylan Reynolds, Chance the Rapper, Njomza, Miguel, J.I.D, Ty
Dolla $ign, SZA, Anderson Paak, John Mayer, Karen Myers, David
Byrnes, Kelly Clancy, Mark McCormick, and Christian Clancy
onstage during “Mac Miller: A Celebration Of Life” Concert
Benefiting The Launch Of The Mac Miller Circles Fund at The
Greek Theatre on October 31, 2018 in Los Angeles, California.
Photo credit: Kevin Winter/Getty Images

On Halloween night, at the Greek Theater in Los Angeles, a
star-studded lineup was assembled — from Miller’s close friends
(Vince Staples, SZA, Earl Sweatshirt) to his collaborators
(Mayer, Miguel) and admirers of his artistry (Travis Scott, Rae
Sremmurd) — for a sold-out tribute concert in his honor. Miller
had been booked to appear there for an early stop on his
Swimming tour. When he died, his team kept the venue for an
opportunity to reflect on his legacy.

“I would have done anything he asked me to do, and he would
have done the same,” Anderson .Paak tells Rolling Stone in the
days leading up to the show. He had promised Miller that he’d
join him onstage that night to perform their Divine Feminine
collaboration “Dang!” Instead, the musician performed alone at
a drum kit, with Miller’s vocals piped in through the PA.
Before launching into their song, .Paak eulogized his late
friend. “I’ve been blessed enough that my closest friends,
they’re still here,” he said. “I know if you’re in this
industry a while, or you just live life long enough, you’ll see
people come and go. But this one was really heavy for me. That
was my friend.”

The concert lasted three hours. There were performances and
tributes and testimonials from a generation-spanning range of
celebrities and collaborators. What they each had to say — from
Pharrell Williams to Lil Wayne, DJ Jazzy Jeff to DJ Premier,
Donald Glover to Dev Hynes — was overwhelmingly positive, and
hard to listen to.

But it was Miller, seen smiling in behind-the-scenes videos
spanning his entire career, that provided the brightest light.

There was Mac goofing around backstage, hamming it up as he
sang Creed songs in the studio, sharing rather than receiving
wisdom with Rick Rubin (“I just make whatever I want to make,
and then I try to fight for it, I guess”). And, as the night
drew to a close, there he was, in a simple clip likely shot on
his smartphone, seated at a piano by himself, singing an
unreleased song. It wasn’t like his normal fare — more Randy
Newman than Rakim — hinting at yet another artistic reinvention
on the horizon, but it was every bit as earnest and affecting
and vulnerable as his best work. “I wonder if they even cared
at all,” Miller sang. The crowd was silent, enraptured. They
did care, still do and always will.
